Add clang/docs/FunctionEffectAnalysis.rst. (#109855)
llvm/llvm-project: clang/docs/FunctionEffectAnalysis.rst

========================
Function Effect Analysis
========================

Introduction
============

> Clang Function Effect Analysis is a C++ language extension which can warn about "unsafe"

Reviewer: It is not only C++, but also works in C I think?

Reviewer: May be worth documenting how to use in C, I know the syntax is a little different with the attrs

  // Typedefs, type aliases.
  typedef void (*NBFunctionPtrTypedef)() [[clang::nonblocking]];
  using NBFunctionPtrTypeAlias_gnu = __attribute__((nonblocking)) void (*)();
  using NBFunctionPtrTypeAlias_std = void (*)() [[clang::nonblocking]];

  // C++ methods
  struct Struct {
    void NBMethod() [[clang::nonblocking]];
  };

  // C++ lambdas
  auto nbLambda = []() [[clang::nonblocking]] {};

  // Blocks
  void (^nbBlock)() = ^() [[clang::nonblocking]] {};

The attribute applies only to the function itself. In particular, it does not apply to any nested
functions or declarations, such as blocks, lambdas, and local classes.

This document uses the C++/C23 syntax ``[[clang::nonblocking]]``, since it parallels the placement 
of the ``noexcept`` specifier, and the attributes have other similarities to ``noexcept``. The GNU
``__attribute__((nonblocking))`` syntax is also supported. Note that it requires a different 
placement on a C++ type alias.

Like ``noexcept``, ``nonblocking`` and ``nonallocating`` have an optional argument, a compile-time
constant boolean expression. By default, the argument is true, so ``[[clang::nonblocking(true)]]``

> is equivalent to ``[[clang::nonblocking]]``, and declares the function type as never locking.

Reviewer: It may be good to mention these also control RealtimeSanitizer and do a link to our documentation page.

After this goes in I can submit a PR to cross link from that page here, as I think it's beneficial to the user to see the connection seeing as the attrs are shared

attribute does not implicitly specify ``noexcept``. (It would be inappropriate for a Clang 
attribute, ignored by non-Clang compilers, to imply a standard language feature.)

``nonblocking(true)`` and ``nonallocating(true)`` apply to function *types*, and by extension, to
function-like declarations. When applied to a declaration with a body, the compiler verifies the
function, as described in the section "Analysis and warnings", below. Functions without an explicit
performance constraint are not verified.

``nonblocking(false)`` and ``nonallocating(false)`` are synonyms for the attributes ``blocking`` and
``allocating``. They can be used on a function-like declaration to explicitly disable any potential
inference of ``nonblocking`` or ``nonallocating`` during verification. (Inference is described later
in this document). ``nonblocking(false)`` and ``nonallocating(false)`` are legal, but superfluous 
when applied to a function *type*. ``float (int) [[nonblocking(false)]]`` and ``float (int)`` are
identical types.

For all functions with no explicit performance constraint, the worst is assumed, that the function

> allocates memory and potentially blocks, unless it can be inferred otherwise, as described in the

Reviewer: nit/style (take it or leave it) - some commas could be removed

Author: @Sirraide, despite my being a former English major who dropped out to hack on computers and play in bands, I don't mind having my writing picked apart at all! Thanks :)

Author: (Though, I am in the middle of incorporating this round of feedback + fixing whatever else looks wrong...)

discussion of verification.

The following list describes the meanings of all permutations of the two attributes and arguments:

- ``nonblocking(true)`` + ``nonallocating(true)``: valid; ``nonallocating(true)`` is superfluous but
  does not contradict the guarantee.
- ``nonblocking(true)`` + ``nonallocating(false)``: error, contradictory.
- ``nonblocking(false)`` + ``nonallocating(true)``: valid; the function does not allocate memory,
  but may lock for other reasons.

> - ``nonblocking(false)`` + ``nonallocating(false)``: valid.

Reviewer: nit (take it or leave it): This may possibly be clearer to show in a code block with the warnings emitted? That matches the style in the rest of the doc and also gives good search strings for the user wondering what's going wrong

Reviewer: I just discovered this table format when updating our docs, which is way way faster and more sustainable to write:

```
.. list-table:: Runtime Flags
   :widths: 20 10 70
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Flag name
     - Default value
     - Short description
   * - halt_on_error
     - true
     - Exit after first reported error.
   * - print_stats_on_exit
     - false
     - Exit after first reported error. If false, deduplicates error stacks so errors only appear once.
   * - color
     - auto
     - Colorize reports: (always|never|auto).
   * - fast_unwind_on_fatal
     - false
     - If available, use the fast frame-pointer-based unwinder on detected errors.

```

Saved me a lot of adjusting/readjusting the "cells" by hand.

  // error: exception specification in declaration does not match previous
  //   declaration

Unlike ``noexcept``, a redeclaration of `f2` with an added or stronger performance constraint is
legal, and propagates the attribute to the previous declaration:

.. code-block:: c++

  int f2();
  int f2() [[clang::nonblocking]]; // redeclaration with stronger constraint is OK.

This greatly eases adoption, by making it possible to annotate functions in external libraries
without modifying library headers.

A redeclaration with a removed or weaker performance constraint produces a warning, in order to
parallel the behavior of ``noexcept``:

.. code-block:: c++

  int f2() { return 42; }
  // warning: attribute 'nonblocking' on function does not match previous declaration

In C++14, the following two declarations of `f3` are identical (a single function). In C++17 they
are separate overloads:

.. code-block:: c++

  void f3(void (*)());
  void f3(void (*)() noexcept);

Similarly, the following two declarations of `f4` are separate overloads. This pattern may pose
difficulties due to ambiguity:

.. code-block:: c++

  void f4(void (*)());
  void f4(void (*)() [[clang::nonblocking]]);

> The attributes have no effect on the mangling of function and method names.

Author: I too was surprised by this when testing various bits of this document against the implementation yesterday.

```
/tmp/foo.cpp:9:2: error: call to 'f3' is ambiguous
    9 |         f3(nullptr);
      |         ^~
/tmp/foo.cpp:1:8: note: candidate function
    1 |   void f3(void (*)()) {}
      |        ^
/tmp/foo.cpp:2:8: note: candidate function
    2 |   void f3(void (*)() noexcept) {}
      |        ^
/tmp/foo.cpp:10:2: error: call to 'f4' is ambiguous
   10 |         f4(nullptr);
      |         ^~
/tmp/foo.cpp:4:8: note: candidate function
    4 |   void f4(void (*)()) {}
      |        ^
/tmp/foo.cpp:5:8: note: candidate function
    5 |   void f4(void (*)() [[clang::nonblocking]]) {}
      |        ^
2 errors generated.
```

We do not have a test for this specific case but I could add one.

> The attributes have no effect on the mangling of function and method names.

Author: There is however this test:
```c++
// --- OVERLOADS ---
#ifdef __cplusplus
struct S {
  void foo(); // expected-note {{previous declaration is here}}
  void foo() [[clang::nonblocking]]; // expected-error {{class member cannot be redeclared}}
};
#endif // __cplusplus
```

> The attributes have no effect on the mangling of function and method names.

Reviewer 2: I’d say add a test for that, yeah (including one that passes for both overloads); doesn’t have to be part of the part 2 pr; that can also be separate.

``noexcept``
------------

``nonblocking`` and ``nonallocating`` are conceptually similar to a stronger form of C++'s
``noexcept``, but with further diagnostics, as described later in this document. Therefore, in C++,
a ``nonblocking`` or ``nonallocating`` function, method, block or lambda should also be declared
``noexcept``.[^6] If ``noexcept`` is missing, a warning is issued. In Clang, this diagnostic is
controlled by ``-Wperf-constraint-implies-noexcept``.

Objective-C
-----------

The attributes are currently unsupported on Objective-C methods.

Analysis and warnings
=====================

Constraints
-----------

Functions declared ``nonallocating`` or ``nonblocking``, when defined, are verified according to the
following rules. Such functions:

1. May not allocate or deallocate memory on the heap. The analysis follows the calls to
   ``operator new`` and ``operator delete`` generated by the ``new`` and ``delete`` keywords, and

>    treats them like any other function call. The global ``operator new`` and ``operator delete``

Reviewer: One question that doesn't necessarily pertain to this PR -- what about user overloads of new and delete? If I overload new and delete to go to some nonblocking memory pool, is there a way I can mark it as safe?

   aren't declared ``nonblocking`` or ``nonallocating`` and so they are considered unsafe. (This
   is correct because most memory allocators are not lock-free. Note that the placement form of
   ``operator new`` is implemented inline in libc++'s ``<new>`` header, and is verifiably
   ``nonblocking``, since it merely casts the supplied pointer to the result type.)

2. May not throw or catch exceptions. To throw, the compiler must allocate the exception on the

>    heap. (Also, many subclasses of ``std::exception`` allocate a ``std::string``). Exceptions are

Author: Ah I was confused by the `std::string` constructor parameters to the exception classes, thanks.

   pointer-to-member function, unless the target is explicitly declared with the same
   ``nonblocking`` or ``nonallocating`` attribute (or stronger).

4. May not make direct calls to any other function, with the following exceptions:

  a. The callee is also explicitly declared with the same ``nonblocking`` or ``nonallocating``
     attribute (or stronger).
  b. The callee is defined in the same translation unit as the caller, does not have the ``false``
     form of the required attribute, and can be verified to be have the same attribute or stronger,
     according to these same rules.
  c. The callee is a built-in function (other than builtins which are known to block or allocate).
  d. The callee is declared ``noreturn`` and, if compiling C++, the callee is also declared
     ``noexcept``. This exception excludes functions such as ``abort()`` and ``std::terminate()``
     from the analysis.

5. May not invoke or access an Objective-C method or property, since ``objc_msgSend()`` calls into 
   the Objective-C runtime, which may allocate memory or otherwise block.

Functions declared ``nonblocking`` have an additional constraint:

> 6. May not declare static local variables (e.g. Meyers singletons). The compiler generates a lock

Reviewer: I think more appropriately "the compiler may generate a lock" -- I'm not sure it is always guaranteed to generate a lock, but will in some circumstances. Someone with more experience than me can confirm or deny

Author: Yeah, when I looked at this a long time ago, I found that the decision in the back-end to emit a lock (or not) didn't seem trivially (ha) replicable in Sema.

a function, when found to be called from a performance-constrained function, can be analyzed to
infer whether it has a desired attribute. This analysis happens when the function is not a virtual
method, and it has a visible definition within the current translation unit (i.e. its body can be
traversed).

.. code-block:: c++

  void notInline();
  int implicitlySafe() { return 42; }
  void implicitlyUnsafe() { notInline(); }

  void example() [[clang::nonblocking]]
  {
    int x = implicitlySafe(); // OK
    implicitlyUnsafe();
    // warning: function with 'nonblocking' attribute must not call non-'nonblocking' function
    //   'implicitlyUnsafe'
    // note (on implicitlyUnsafe): function cannot be inferred 'nonblocking' because it calls
    //   non-'nonblocking' function 'notInline'
    // note (on notInline()): declaration cannot be inferred 'nonblocking' because it has no
    //   definition in this translation unit
  }

Lambdas and blocks
------------------

As mentioned earlier, the performance constraint attributes apply only to a single function and not
to any code nested inside it, including blocks, lambdas, and local classes. It is possible for a

> lock-free function to schedule the execution of a blocking lambda on another thread. Similarly, a

Reviewer: "It is possible for a non-blocking function to schedule..."

lock-free possibly left over from old draft

blocking function may create a ``nonblocking`` lambda for use in a realtime context.

Operations which create, destroy, copy, and move lambdas and blocks are analyzed in terms of the
underlying function calls. For example, the creation of a lambda with captures generates a function
call to an anonymous struct's constructor, passing the captures as parameters.

Implicit function calls in the AST
----------------------------------

The ``nonblocking`` / ``nonallocating`` analysis occurs at the Sema phase of analysis in Clang.
During Sema, there are some constructs which will eventually become function calls, but do not
appear as function calls in the AST. For example, ``auto* foo = new Foo;`` becomes a declaration
containing a ``CXXNewExpr`` which is understood as a function call to the global ``operator new``
(in this example), and a ``CXXConstructExpr``, which, for analysis purposes, is a function call to
``Foo``'s constructor. Most gaps in the analysis would be due to incomplete knowledge of AST
constructs which become function calls.

> Disabling diagnostics

Reviewer: nit: May consider moving this further up the document, I know as a user when I crack open these docs my first questions are: how do I use it (basically) and how do I disable it.

The closer this information is to the top of the doc, the better

Author: I'm kinda keen on a natural order of exposition. But maybe a table of contents will address this?

<img width="414" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c219f8e4-692b-478d-b3cf-72036e7ef553">

Reviewer 2: Hmm, that might help yeah

Adoption
========

There are a few common issues that arise when adopting the ``nonblocking`` and ``nonallocating``
attributes.

C++ exceptions
--------------

Exceptions pose a challenge to the adoption of the performance constraints. Common library functions
which throw exceptions include:

+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method                           | Alternative                                                           |
+==================================+=======================================================================+
| ``std::vector<T>::at()``         | ``operator[](size_t)``, after verifying that the index is in range.   |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``std::optional<T>::value()``    | ``operator*``, after checking ``has_value()`` or ``operator bool()``. |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``std::expected<T, E>::value()`` | Same as for ``std::optional<T>::value()``.                            |

> +----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Reviewer: nice, this is helpful

Interactions with type-erasure techniques
-----------------------------------------

``std::function<R(Args...)>`` illustrates a common C++ type-erasure technique. Using template
argument deduction, it decomposes a function type into its return and parameter types. Additional
components of the function type, including ``noexcept``, ``nonblocking``, ``nonallocating``, and any
other attributes, are discarded.

Standard library support for these components of a function type is not immediately forthcoming.

Code can work around this limitation in either of two ways:

> 1. Avoid abstractions like ``std::function`` and instead work directly with the original lambda type.

Reviewer: Not sure if it is worth mentioning, but most std::function implementations (all?) allocate under some circumstances opaque to the user, so even if the attribute was not lost it is still unsafe.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, afaik, `std::function` is a bit like `std::string` in that regard: if the function pointer (+ its context if it’s a lambda) is small enough (whatever that means for any one implementation), it’s stored inline; otherwise, it has to allocate.

Reviewer 2: So yeah, not sure option 2 below is even *possible* in the general case—it certainly isn’t for all possible lambdas.

I’d also add something like `llvm::function_ref` (iirc `std::function_ref` is also a thing since C++26 and does the exact same thing) as another option: it doesn’t own the underlying callable and thus doesn’t have to store it or allocate anything. It’s basically to `std::function` what `std::string_view` is to `std::string`. That works pretty well for function parameters, but it falls apart if you actually need to store the callable, of course.

Static local variables are often used for lazily-constructed globals (Meyers singletons). Beyond the
compiler's use of a lock to ensure thread-safe initialization, it is dangerously easy to
inadvertently trigger initialization, involving heap allocation, from a ``nonblocking`` or
``nonallocating`` context.

Generally, such singletons need to be replaced by globals, and care must be taken to ensure their
initialization before they are used from ``nonblocking`` or ``nonallocating`` contexts.

Annotating libraries
--------------------

It can be surprising that the analysis does not depend on knowledge of any primitives; it simply
assumes the worst, that all function calls are unsafe unless explicitly marked as safe or able to be
inferred as safe. With ``nonblocking``, this appears to suffice for all but the most primitive of
spinlocks.

At least for an operating system's C functions, it is possible to define an override header which
redeclares safe common functions (e.g. ``pthread_self()``) with the addition of ``nonblocking``.
This may help in adopting the feature incrementally.

It also helps that for many of the functions in ``<math.h>``, Clang generates calls to built-in

> functions, which the diagnosis understands to be safe.

Reviewer 2: I think we generally just treat most C standard library functions as builtins, not just `<cmath>`, don’t we?

Author: Yeah, math.h is just the first cluster of examples I ran into in adoption...

aborting if an exception is thrown, while the ``nonallocating`` and ``nonblocking`` attributes are
purely for compile-time analysis and have no potential runtime behavior. Nonetheless, Clang emits a
warning if, in C++, a function is declared ``nonblocking`` or ``nonallocating`` without
``noexcept``. This diagnostic is controlled by ``-Wperf-constraint-implies-noexcept``.

Also, the ``nonblocking`` and ``blocking`` attributes do have special runtime behavior in code built
with Clang's :doc:`RealtimeSanitizer`.

``nonblocking(true)`` and ``nonallocating(true)`` apply to function *types*, and by extension, to
function-like declarations. When applied to a declaration with a body, the compiler verifies the
function, as described in the section "Analysis and warnings", below. Functions without an explicit
performance constraint are not verified.

``blocking`` and ``allocating`` are synonyms for ``nonblocking(false)`` and
``nonallocating(false)``, respectively. They can be used on a function-like declaration to
explicitly disable any potential inference of ``nonblocking`` or ``nonallocating`` during
verification. (Inference is described later in this document). ``nonblocking(false)`` and

> ``nonallocating(false)`` are legal, but superfluous  when applied to a function *type*.
> ``float (int) [[nonblocking(false)]]`` and ``float (int)`` are identical types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``nonallocating(false)`` are legal, but superfluous  when applied to a function *type*
that is not part of a declarator: ``float (int) [[nonblocking(false)]]`` and 
``float (int)`` are identical types.
```
Just because that might not be 100% clear otherwise.

For functions with no explicit performance constraint, the worst is assumed: the function
allocates memory and potentially blocks, unless it can be inferred otherwise. This is detailed in the
discussion of verification.

The following example describes the meanings of all permutations of the two attributes and arguments:

.. code-block:: c++

  void nb1_na1() [[clang::nonblocking(true)]] [[clang::nonallocating(true)]];
  // Valid; nonallocating(true) is superfluous but doesn't contradict the guarantee.

  void nb1_na0() [[clang::nonblocking(true)]] [[clang::nonallocating(false)]];
  // error: 'allocating' and 'nonblocking' attributes are not compatible

  void nb0_na1() [[clang::nonblocking(false)]] [[clang::nonallocating(true)]];
  // Valid; the function does not allocate memory, but may lock for other reasons.

  void nb0_na0() [[clang::nonblocking(false)]] [[clang::nonallocating(false)]];
  // Valid.

Type conversions
----------------

A performance constraint can be removed or weakened via an implicit conversion. An attempt to add

> or strengthen a performance constraint is unsafe and results in a warning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or strengthen a performance constraint is unsafe and results in a warning. The rules for this
are comparable to that for ``noexcept`` in C++17 and later.
```
That might help people who are familiar w/ how `noexcept` works.

.. code-block:: c++

  void unannotated();
  void nonblocking() [[clang::nonblocking]];
  void nonallocating() [[clang::nonallocating]];

  void example()
  {
    // It's fine to remove a performance constraint.
    void (*fp_plain)();
    fp_plain = unannotated;
    fp_plain = nonblocking;
    fp_plain = nonallocating;

    // Adding/spoofing nonblocking is unsafe.
    void (*fp_nonblocking)() [[clang::nonblocking]];
    fp_nonblocking = nullptr;
    fp_nonblocking = nonblocking;
    fp_nonblocking = unannotated;
    // ^ warning: attribute 'nonblocking' should not be added via type conversion
    fp_nonblocking = nonallocating;
    // ^ warning: attribute 'nonblocking' should not be added via type conversion

    // Adding/spoofing nonallocating is unsafe.
    void (*fp_nonallocating)() [[clang::nonallocating]];
    fp_nonallocating = nullptr;
    fp_nonallocating = nonallocating;
    fp_nonallocating = nonblocking; // no warning because nonblocking includes nonallocating 
    fp_nonallocating = unannotated;
    // ^ warning: attribute 'nonallocating' should not be added via type conversion
  }

Virtual methods
---------------

> In C++, when a base class's virtual method has a performance constraint, overriding methods in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In C++, when a virtual method has a performance constraint, overriding methods in
```
‘overriding methods in subclasses’ already makes it clear what’s happening here.

subclasses inherit the constraint.

.. code-block:: c++

  struct Base {
    virtual void unsafe();
    virtual void safe() noexcept [[clang::nonblocking]];
  };

  struct Derived : public Base {
    void unsafe() [[clang::nonblocking]] override;
    // It's okay for an overridden method to be more constrained

    void safe() noexcept override;
    // This method is implicitly declared `nonblocking`, inherited from Base.
  };

Redeclarations, overloads, and name mangling
--------------------------------------------

The ``nonblocking`` and ``nonallocating`` attributes, like ``noexcept``, do not factor into
argument-dependent lookup and overloaded functions/methods.

First, consider that ``noexcept`` is integral to a function's type:

.. code-block:: c++

  void f1(int);
  void f1(int) noexcept;
  // error: exception specification in declaration does not match previous
  //   declaration

> Unlike ``noexcept``, a redeclaration of `f2` with an added or stronger performance constraint is
> legal, and propagates the attribute to the previous declaration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unlike ``noexcept``, a redeclaration of ``f2`` with an added or stronger performance constraint is
legal and propagates the attribute to the previous declaration:
```

.. code-block:: c++

  int f2();
  int f2() [[clang::nonblocking]]; // redeclaration with stronger constraint is OK.

> This greatly eases adoption, by making it possible to annotate functions in external libraries

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This greatly eases adoption by making it possible to annotate functions in external libraries
```

without modifying library headers.

> A redeclaration with a removed or weaker performance constraint produces a warning, in order to
> parallel the behavior of ``noexcept``:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A redeclaration with a removed or weaker performance constraint produces a warning, paralleling
the behavior of ``noexcept``:
```
‘in order to’ is technically wrong: we don’t warn ‘just because `noexcept` does’, but because it makes sense to warn on it ;Þ

.. code-block:: c++

  int f2() { return 42; }
  // warning: attribute 'nonblocking' on function does not match previous declaration

In C++14, the following two declarations of `f3` are identical (a single function). In C++17 they
are separate overloads:

.. code-block:: c++

  void f3(void (*)());
  void f3(void (*)() noexcept);

Similarly, the following two declarations of `f4` are separate overloads. This pattern may pose
difficulties due to ambiguity:

.. code-block:: c++

  void f4(void (*)());
  void f4(void (*)() [[clang::nonblocking]]);

The attributes have no effect on the mangling of function and method names.

``noexcept``
------------

``nonblocking`` and ``nonallocating`` are conceptually similar to a stronger form of C++'s
``noexcept``, but with further diagnostics, as described later in this document. Therefore, in C++,
a ``nonblocking`` or ``nonallocating`` function, method, block or lambda should also be declared

> ``noexcept``.

Reviewer 2: I think we can just remove this section entirely? Didn’t we already pretty much state exactly this above where we mentioned the `-Wperf-constraint-implies-noexcept` warning?

   aren't declared ``nonblocking`` or ``nonallocating`` and so they are considered unsafe. (This
   is correct because most memory allocators are not lock-free. Note that the placement form of
   ``operator new`` is implemented inline in libc++'s ``<new>`` header, and is verifiably
   ``nonblocking``, since it merely casts the supplied pointer to the result type.)

2. May not throw or catch exceptions. To throw, the compiler must allocate the exception on the
   heap. (Also, many subclasses of ``std::exception`` allocate a string). Exceptions are
   deallocated when caught.

3. May not make any indirect function call, via a virtual method, function pointer, or
   pointer-to-member function, unless the target is explicitly declared with the same
   ``nonblocking`` or ``nonallocating`` attribute (or stronger).

4. May not make direct calls to any other function, with the following exceptions:

  a. The callee is also explicitly declared with the same ``nonblocking`` or ``nonallocating``
     attribute (or stronger).
  b. The callee is defined in the same translation unit as the caller, does not have the ``false``

>      form of the required attribute, and can be verified to be have the same attribute or stronger,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     form of the required attribute, and can be verified to have the same attribute or stronger,
```

   protecting the initialization of the variable.

Violations of any of these rules result in warnings, in the ``-Wfunction-effects`` category:

.. code-block:: c++

  void notInline();

  void example() [[clang::nonblocking]]
  {
    auto* x = new int;
    // warning: function with 'nonblocking' attribute must not allocate or deallocate
    //   memory

    if (x == nullptr) {
      static Logger* logger = createLogger();
      // warning: function with 'nonblocking' attribute must not have static local variables

      throw std::runtime_warning{ "null" };
      // warning: 'nonblocking" function 'example' must not throw exceptions
    }
    notInline();
    // warning: 'function with 'nonblocking' attribute must not call non-'nonblocking' function
    //   'notInline'
    // note (on notInline()): declaration cannot be inferred 'nonblocking' because it has no
    //   definition in this translation unit
  }

Inferring ``nonblocking`` or ``nonallocating``
----------------------------------------------

In the absence of a ``nonblocking`` or ``nonallocating`` attribute (whether ``true`` or ``false``),

> a function, when found to be called from a performance-constrained function, can be analyzed to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a function that is called from a performance-constrained function may be analyzed to
```

During Sema, there are some constructs which will eventually become function calls, but do not
appear as function calls in the AST. For example, ``auto* foo = new Foo;`` becomes a declaration
containing a ``CXXNewExpr`` which is understood as a function call to the global ``operator new``
(in this example), and a ``CXXConstructExpr``, which, for analysis purposes, is a function call to
``Foo``'s constructor. Most gaps in the analysis would be due to incomplete knowledge of AST
constructs which become function calls.

Disabling diagnostics
---------------------

Function effect diagnostics are controlled by ``-Wfunction-effects``.

A construct like this can be used to exempt code from the checks described here:

.. code-block:: c++

  #define NONBLOCKING_UNSAFE(...)                                    \
    _Pragma("clang diagnostic push")                                 \
    _Pragma("clang diagnostic ignored \"-Wunknown-warning-option\"") \
    _Pragma("clang diagnostic ignored \"-Wfunction-effects\"")       \
    __VA_ARGS__                                                      \
    _Pragma("clang diagnostic pop")

Disabling the diagnostic allows for:

> - constructs which do block, but which in practice are used in ways to avoid unbounded blocking,
>   e.g. a thread pool with semaphores to coordinate multiple realtime threads.
> - using libraries which are safe but not yet annotated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- constructs which do block, but which in practice are used in ways to avoid unbounded blocking,
  e.g. a thread pool with semaphores to coordinate multiple realtime threads;
- using libraries which are safe but not yet annotated;
```

which throw exceptions include:

+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Method                           | Alternative                                                           |
+==================================+=======================================================================+
| ``std::vector<T>::at()``         | ``operator[](size_t)``, after verifying that the index is in range.   |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``std::optional<T>::value()``    | ``operator*``, after checking ``has_value()`` or ``operator bool()``. |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``std::expected<T, E>::value()`` | Same as for ``std::optional<T>::value()``.                            |
+----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

``std::function<R(Args...)>``
-----------------------------

``std::function<R(Args...)>`` is generally incompatible with ``nonblocking`` and ``nonallocating``

> code, because an implementation typically allocates heap memory in the constructor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
code, because a typical implementation may allocate heap memory in the constructor.
```
Iirc most implementations of `std::function` make use of small-buffer optimisation like `std::string`, so function pointers, non-capturing lambdas, etc. can be stored inline.

parameter is the functor class ``nonblocking_fp``.

Static local variables
----------------------

Static local variables are often used for lazily-constructed globals (Meyers singletons). Beyond the
compiler's use of a lock to ensure thread-safe initialization, it is dangerously easy to
inadvertently trigger initialization, involving heap allocation, from a ``nonblocking`` or
``nonallocating`` context.

Generally, such singletons need to be replaced by globals, and care must be taken to ensure their
initialization before they are used from ``nonblocking`` or ``nonallocating`` contexts.

Annotating libraries
--------------------

It can be surprising that the analysis does not depend on knowledge of any primitives; it simply
assumes the worst, that all function calls are unsafe unless explicitly marked as safe or able to be
inferred as safe. With ``nonblocking``, this appears to suffice for all but the most primitive of
spinlocks.

At least for an operating system's C functions, it is possible to define an override header which
redeclares safe common functions (e.g. ``pthread_self()``) with the addition of ``nonblocking``.
This may help in adopting the feature incrementally.

> It also helps that for many of the functions in the standard C libraries (notably ``<math.h>``),
> Clang generates calls to built-in functions, which the diagnosis understands to be safe.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It also helps that many of the functions in the standard C libraries (notably ``<math.h>``)
are treated as built-in functions by Clang, which the diagnosis understands to be safe.
```
